In this segment I'm going to
return to dependency parsing.
Right in the first segment I introduced
the idea of dependency syntax.
But let's look again at how that worked.
So the idea of dependency syntax is
you connect up the words of a sentence
by putting arrows between them.
That show relationships of being
modifiers or arguments of other words.
So here in this example, we've got the
head of the whole sentence, submitted, and
it's got its dependents.
So it's got bills submitted by somebody
and then also the auxiliary verb, were.
Now, not necessarily, but
quite commonly the arrows are typed by
the name of some grammatical relation.
And so we can see that here we've
got the subject of the passive,
the verbal auxiliary and
the prepositional relationship.
The other things that you should know
about just a bit of the terminology.
So firstly, when we have an arrow,
we always have the thing
that is the head or
the governor, here submitted.
And the thing that is the dependent,
modifier, inferior,
various words you use that you
can see over here, here bills.
So that they're the two ends, the governor
and the governed thing of a dependency.
Now out beyond that, there's actually some
inconsistency about how things are done.
So in these slides and in the original
dependency grammar work of Tesniere,
the arrows run from
the governor to the dependent.
But you can absolutely also find other
work that points the arrows the other way.
And actually if like here you're
using height in the tree to show
what's dependent of what, you actually
don't need to have any arrows at all.
You could just draw these as lines
without any arrowhead on them.
Okay, so as in this example, normally what
you find is that dependencies form a tree.
So that there's a root node, and
then from there everything heads
down with words having a single head and
in a nice acyclic manner.
I should mention also that it's actually
quite common to add sort of one pseudo
node at the top, often called root or wall
which points at the head of the sentence.
And that actually makes things a lot
cleaner, both in terms of the parsing
algorithms but also in terms of things
like evaluation and representation.
Because then you get the property
that every word of the sentence,
including the root is
the dependent of one thing.
And so you can think of it as doing an
assignment process of working out what is
the governor of each word of the sentence.
How does dependency grammar relate to
the kind of phrase structure grammar
that we've concentrated on so far?
Well, the central innovation is
really that dependency grammar
is built around the notion of
having heads and dependents.
Whereas, the basic case of
a context free grammar,
there's no notion of a head whatsoever.
And actually things have
moved on from there.
If you look at modern linguistic theory,
that means things like
X-bar grammar to linguists.
Or our modern statistical parsers, like
the Charniak, Collins, or Stanford parser.
All of them have a notion of head and
use it extensively.
So for example, in all these parsers,
there's a notion of head rules where it
will identify some category as
the head of a larger category.
And as soon as you have head rules of
the kind that we discussed before,
well then you can straightforwardly
get the dependencies out
of a phrase structure representation.
So basically you kind of
have a spine of head chains.
And then everywhere you have something
coming off that, that's a dependent.
So we have a dependency
from walked to Sue and
a dependency from walked into,
this is another head chain.
And then we´ve got another dependency
from into store, head chain and
dependency, store the.
So we have a basis for
a dependency representation
inside a phrase structure tree if and
only if we have heads represented.
What about if we go in
the opposite direction?
If you try and go from dependencies to
phrase structure, you can reconstruct
a phrase structure tree by taking the
closure of the dependencies of a word and
saying that those represent a constituent.
But it slightly changes the representation
from what we normally see
in phrase structure trees.
In particular, in a situation like this,
you can't have
a VP node because actually both Sue and
into are dependents of walked.
And therefore all three of those
must have a flat phrase structure
representation where you have the head and
its two dependents, Sue and into.
How do people go about
doing dependency parsing?
A whole variety of methods have
been used for dependency parsing.
One method to do it is with
a dynamic programming algorithm like
the CKY algorithm that we saw for
phrase structure parsing.
Now if you do this naively
by adding in heads,
you end up with something similar to
the lexicalized probabilistic context-free
grammars we saw earlier, and end up
with an O big n to the fifth algorithm.
But there's a clever reformulation of what
the parse items are due to Jason Eisner
in 1996, which makes the complexity of
doing dependency parsing also n cubed.
Which is kind of what you'd hope
it would be just thinking about
the nature of the operation.
But there are a whole
bunch of other methods.
So people have directly used graph
algorithms to do dependency parsing.
So one idea from the algorithms literature
is that you can construct a maximum
spanning tree for a sentence.
Because since you want all words connected
together to be the dependent of something,
that means you have to build a tree that
spans all the words in the sentence.
And that's the idea that's used
in the well known MSTParser.
There are other ideas of
constraint satisfaction where you
start off with an dense set of
edges between all words and
then eliminate ones that don't
satisfy hard constraints.
But a final trend in dependency parsing,
and
actually what we are going to focus
on here, is a way of doing dependency
parsing where you head left to
right through the sentence.
And make greedy decisions based
on machine learning classifiers
as to which words to connect
to other words as dependents.
And so the most well known example
of this framework is MaltParser.
And I'm going to concentrate on this just
partly because it's very different than
what we did for our approach to phrase
structure parsing we looked at in depth.
But also because it's been shown that this
kind of method of doing dependency parsing
actually works extremely well, it can
work accurately and exceedingly quickly.
So it's just a good thing to know about
as a different point in the space.
No matter how we do dependency parsing,
we need some sources of information to let
us choose between possible analyses and
which words to take as
dependents of other words.
So here's a list of the main
sources of information people use.
So the most obvious source of
information is bilexical dependency.
So if we have something like
a dependency between issues and the.
Well, we can look at
the word that's the head and
look at the word that's the dependent,
and say is that likely?
That's similar to
the bilexical dependencies
of our earlier lexicalized PCFGs.
But we don't want to use
that as our only source of
information partly because
lexical information is so sparse.
And there are several other
good sources of information, so
let's just go through those.
So one is the distance between
the head and the dependent.
And if you look at this picture,
what you'll see is that most dependencies
are short, they're with nearby words.
There are a couple of exceptions.
So, this dependency here is a pretty long
one, but most of them are pretty short.
Other sources of information,
what is the intervening material.
So, in general,
dependencies don't cross over verbs, and
commonly they don't
cross over punctuation.
Some exceptions,
commas quite often cross over.
So looking at the words in
between can give information
about whether a dependency is likely or
not.
A final source of information is
looking at the valency of heads.
And that's saying, for
a particular word, what kind of
dependents does it typically take?
So a word like the typically takes
no dependents on the left and
no dependents on the right,
as in this case here.
On the other hand if you have
a word that is say a noun,
it will take dependents like
adjectives and articles on the left,
but it won't take those kind
of dependents on the right.
But it can take other kinds of
words as dependents on the right.
For example,
take prepositional phrase modifiers or
relative clauses as
dependents on the right.
So you can develop a quite rich typology
of what kind of dependents words take.
Okay, that should give you a better
sense of what dependency representations
look like, and the big picture of
how we go about parsing with them.
In the next segment we'll introduce a
concrete algorithm for dependency parsing.